---
title: Journey to the East(ern Canada) - Toronto
date: 2025-06-5
dateFormat: full
tags: [travel, story, life]
---

## Preface: So I may have lied about not blogging my personal life

But a 28-night journey around Eastern and Atlantic Canada was calling for itself to be documented. Hence, what follows
this and the subsequent blog posts is my tech-turned-travel blog about how I decided not to spend the month of June
rotting indoors, and finally finish my bucket list of traveling coast to coast. Special thanks to my parents for funding
this unemployed student, I couldn't have done this without you!

# Toronto

## Day 0 - Flying over

After almost being uncharged $50 because the wheels of my suitcase were a centimeter outside the carry-on constraint,
I'm off the ground and heading to Pearson Airport. Fairly standard budget airline flight, aka I can't lean back without
my knees hitting the seat.

My family had previously visited Toronto a couple years back, where we rented a car to drive around the city. Anyone who
has had the misfortune of moving there will also know the horrid traffic and endless quest for parking. Tourists who
truly want to experience living like a local will often get stuck on the 403 under construction for two hours.

![test](./20250531_165019.avif)

This time, however, I wanted to travel only by public transit, shuttles, and trains. My first four major cities,
Toronto, Ottawa, Montreal, and Quebec City, all use cards for tapping on and off transit. After landing at Pearson
Airport, Terminal 3 has a link train that connects directly with the UP station at Terminal 1. There I purchased a
Presto Card, the system used in the Greater Toronto Area (GTA), and Ottawa.

![Presto Vending Machines](./20250531_200621.avif) ![UP train from the Airport to Union Station](./20250531_202839.avif)
![Union UP station](./20250531_205047.avif)

It sucks that this one train is triple the price of a bus though, taking the airport bus to the metro would only cost
one fare instead of three. Still, I landed pretty late and wanted the convenience of getting to Union Station. You get
to see the different aspects of the city from the suburbs into downtown, plus some gorgeous graffiti murals.

Since I'm traveling solo and didn't have a car to sleep in, I opted for staying in hostels. There are many perks to
hostels over hotels or Airbnb; Besides the cheaper cost, hostels are catered to backpackers (like me) and usually
provides breakfast, a kitchen, bed sheets, and showers (sometimes with towels, you should probably bring your own
supplies just in case). They are also usually located near transit hubs, or in a popular location like downtown.
Depending on your personality, staying with like-minded travelers is also a nice way to socialize, share stories, and
make potential acquaintances. On the flip side, since everyone is sleeping together, the biggest concern to worry about
is thieves. While every location I'm staying at has electronic locks and free lockers, you still need to watch over your
stuff just in case. I keep my suitcase with clothes in luggage storage, while my backpack stays next to me at all times.

My first hostel is The Only Backpackers Inn, which as the name implies is the only remaining hostel in Toronto (post
Covid). Another interesting fact is that local GTA residents are banned from staying in hostels.

This place definitely feels the most rustic, hole in the wall type building. Being built above a narrow cafe/bar on
Danforth Ave, the compact designs of all the rooms become pretty cozy. Very compact bathrooms, 6-person dorms, and a big
enough kitchen to socialize in.

![Outside the only cafe](./20250531_225941.avif) ![Bunk beds of The Backpacker Inn](./20250531_230834.avif)

## Day 1 - "West" Downtown

To kick off my little escapade, I planned to start downtown if I hadn't managed to pick the one day TTC was renovating
the subway. I instead got squished onto replacement buses that took 10 times as long because of bumper-to-bumper traffic
on a Sunday.

So right off the bat, I'm already discarding my original route and improvising from the university campus. Can't
complain, it's a calm area within busy Toronto downtown. Many gothic-style buildings date back to the university's
origins in the 19th century. The summer (and especially on a Sunday) meant the campus was virtually empty and a very
peaceful place to walk around. Would have loved to sneak into the buildings though~

![UoT Library](./20250601_094718.avif) ![Kings Collage](./20250601_095106.avif)
![Pathway towards the Soldier's tower](./20250601_095250.avif) ![Outside yet another collage](./20250601_095919.avif)
![Parliament building](./20250601_101404.avif)

From campus, I strolled past the legislative building and crossed some neighborhoods to reach Chinatown, full of
interesting businesses and peak food if it wasn't a Sunday morning and everything was closed. For future reference, 11am
weekend is probably the time to visit. At least I got some food on my way out.

![Juicy dumpling](./20250601_110024.avif)

Walking west out of Dragon Mall is Kensington, known for its dense markets of small stores and restaurants. While I
think Chinatown the better value for food, the neighborhood is still interesting enough to visit at least once. I just
followed the crowd and grabbed whatever seemed popular.

![A street in Kensington](./20250601_113141.avif) ![Alleyway with lots of graffiti](./20250601_112803.avif)
![Flee market in an alley](./20250601_114059.avif)

Kensington is between Queens St, a central street lined with shops, and College St, linking to Little Italy and Korea
Town. With no goal in mind, I end up wandering through whatever neighborhood looks interesting and let myself get lost
among the dense residential areas. Much of the housing outside Toronto core are small, Victorian-style compact housing
that remained unchanged for the decades since they were first built. In fact, just a short walk around outer Toronto
really shows the cities history.

![Old buildings in Toronto](./20250601_122002.avif) ![Outdoor fire escapes](./20250601_170250.avif)

Among the constantly congested roads everywhere I went, to the busy urban shops along yet another congested road, I get
to wonder how the locals resist throwing themselves off Gardiner Express from all the damn congestion. Like seriously,
compare the streetcars of Toronto to any European tram and see how absurd it is that the streetcars are in the same
lanes with the cars? So they also wait at red lights and get stuck with all the cars? And that the streetcar just stops
on the left lane and passengers exit onto the street? I've witness multiple close calls with speeding cars and bikes,
and wonder why it's the riders responsibility to look right for traffic before unboarding?

I live by the Strong Towns saying that the only solution to traffic is viable alternatives to driving. Being able to
out-walk 3 streetcars because they are stuck in the same traffic jam with the cars definitely doesn't count. Also,
street parking fucking everywhere only makes the city uglier and harder to navigate for everyone.

All my walking is naturally tiring, especially carrying my backpack with supplies I bought from local grocery stores.
There are smaller parks with benches throughout the neighborhoods, all serving as great places to slow down and enjoy
the peace. Eventually, I ended up in Trinity Bellwood Park, a spacious green area full of picnics and sports. Couldn't
help but sit down and start people-watching.

![View of the park](./20250601_130724.avif) ![Soccer players, CN tower in background](./20250601_132226.avif)

Also, this section is called the dog bowl, a pretty clever way to build a no-leash dog park eh.

![image of the Dog Bowl Park](./20250601_133243.avif)

Connected to Queens, I finally get back to where I originally wanted to explore, until I stumble upon Ossington. A
bustling street full of local bars/restaurants/small shops. There also seemed to be some advertising campaign on car
barriers to promote the area, which really made me wonder why they couldn't make the road a pedestrian area. There are
too many roads here anyway, removing the cars that are racing past the people cramped onto the sidewalks would
exponentially help boost attraction to potential customers. Otherwise, there were plenty of good choices for eating out,
just like Kensington.

![Image of Ossington Street](./20250601_140000.avif)

Going back to Little Italy, there is an Italian joint called Sugo, a crazy busy joint in stark contrast to the
surrounding area... I got lucky with a single spot on the barstools, otherwise the line could be up to an hour without
reservation. Somewhat pricy, but their creamy pesto sauce is great.

![Interior of Sugo](./20250601_154158.avif) ![Creamy Pesto Sauce pasta](./20250601_154311.avif)

Continuing to wander west, up to Dufferin and back towards Queens, let's just say the foot traffic gets quieter and
quieter. Loud roads, more homeless, less to see, and more to walk faster away from. The encampment at Dufferin Park,
however, surprised me with how clean the tents were. In my city struggling with a drug crisis, the "encampment" areas
are always covered in spilled trash and reeks of filth. With the cost of living in Toronto as is, I wonder how many of
those homeless couldn't afford rent and moved into the park. Not to say that Toronto doesn't struggle as much with
homelessness, addiction, or litter, because they still do. Look close enough and you can find cigarette butts anywhere.

![Tail end of Queens West](./20250601_170235.avif)

Even as Queens became less and less... desirable to walk down, I managed to reach the end. The streetcar station was
nearby, but then I saw this walkway to the shores.

![View of shores from the walkway](./20250601_170520.avif) ![View of Queens from shores](./20250601_171612.avif)

It's a nice jogging and cycling trail along the coast; I got on a nearby bike share and took myself all the way back to
downtown.

![View of water and bikers](./20250601_173908.avif) ![Bike trail back to main harbour](./20250601_175529.avif)
![Me on red chair, working on laptop at the harbour](./20250601_190602.avif)

Also someone recognized my framework laptop! Just wanted to write that down lol.

## Day 2 - Central Island

The funny thing about waking up early (8am) is that most places open around 10am. So after realizing the brunch place I
was waiting on also didn't open on Monday, I headed downtown to pick up some picnic subs. My ham sub cost about as much
as a Subway, but at least it didn't taste stale.

Get distracted, wander past a union strike, wind up in front of the CN tower -- as people normally do. I've already gone
up the tower with my family before, but a stable of any Toronto trip alongside Ripely Aquarium for first time visitors.

![Side view of Roger's Stadium](./20250602_103311.avif) ![Bottom of CN tower](./20250602_103713.avif)

Crossing a three street/nine lane intersection towards the waterfront, the paths and green spaces along the coast are
just really nice spaces to be in. Coastal breeze keeps the area cool, and there are plenty of open spots and natural
shade to get comfortable. Unfortunately, The noise pollution from the nearby roads and the airport on the neighboring
island is really annoying.

Speaking of islands, along the harbour are various "water taxi" services. All of them are competing to shuttle tourist
to central island, and definitely won't bring uo the official, cheaper Toronto water ferry. For reference, the ferry
charged me $9.11 round trip, while the taxi in the neighboring port was asking $14 one way (the ferry takes everyone
back to the mainland). During the busier summertime, lines for the ferry get really long, and taxis become a faster
alternative to waiting. [This website explains everything I needed to know.](https://www.torontoisland.com/ferry.php)

![Distance shot of the ferry and an overhead plane](./20250602_112338.avif)

I happen to catch the ferry for East Ward Point, but there are also routes for West Hanlan's Point, and the popular
middle island with most of the attractions. There are bike shares around the center with excellent routes, I ended up
walking across the entire island in a casual 4 hours.

Ward's point houses much of the residential zones, with quiet pathways and a lovely boardwalk along the south shores.

![Boardwalk along Ward Point](./20250602_115225.avif) ![Small dock around Ward Point](./20250602_123043.avif)

Middle Island is much busier, with a pristine garden plaza, amusement park, restaurants, and a floating dock.

![Water fountain at plaza center](./20250602_131714.avif) ![Lake view at central island](./20250602_131957.avif)
![Cool dock at end of path](./20250602_131714.avif)

Hanlan's Point is considerably more remote and less busy, with preserved natural areas, beaches, and a lighthouse.

![Historical Toronto Lighthouse](./20250602_142839.avif)

Hanlan's Point is also a significant place for the 2SLGBTQ+ community, being the site of Canada's first Gay Pride
celebration and a century-old queer space. Hanlan's Point also contains a nudist beach, which I spent 20 minutes lost in
because the next exit was really far. I recommend walking on the sand path behind the beach to avoid any tanners, and
enter through the northern entrances.

![Pride bike road](./20250602_145756.avif)

One long walk down the pride path is the ferry terminal. There are also busses connecting Hanlan's to Central Terminal,
probably to avoid the longer lines.

![Old ship at Hanlan's Point](./20250602_151316.avif)

Have to reiterate this again, but the walk along the coast is really nice. I ended up strolling all the way back to
where I ended yesterday's bike ride. Nearby was the museum garden, nice natural steps to relax on, and a great spot to
accidentally watch a children's show.

![Me at garden steps. Kid show behind laptop](./20250602_172451.avif.avif)

## Day 3 - Central Downtown and Bluejay Games

The St. Lawrence market near King/Union Station has become the defacto farmers market in Toronto, with tons of booths
selling all sorts of foodstuff. The south building has been around since Old Toronto was called York and is open 6 days
excluding Monday. The north building recently finished construction, but only opens on Saturday. It's also built so
minimalistic that everything feels sterile and small and just boring? South building was my priority.

![Interior of main floor](./20250603_102246.avif)

There are tons of blogs and reviews about the "famous" Peameal Bacon sandwich, so I had to try it myself. Contrary to
those reviews, it seems the price went up to where it's honestly not worth the okay sandwich.

![Me holding the peameal sandwich](./20250603_102756.avif)

There are a plenty of local sellers inside the main floor and basements, selling everything from vegetables, meats,
cheeses, seafood, and various ethnic grocers.

![Grocery stall with fruits on display](./20250603_104755.avif) ![Interior of basement floor](./20250603_105335.avif)

A short walk away is the Distillery District, a former center for alcohol production turned pedestrianized tourist spot.
Definitely more of a nightlife centre as most places weren't open when I arrived, but the view was still worth the
visit.

![Peace sign at the Distillery District](./20250603_114221.avif)
![Main plaza of the Distillery District](./20250603_114440.avif)

I then decided to try biking back to visit the cathedral church of St. James. The Tangerine app does show bike routes
and docking stations. However, I got kinda lost. The nearest dock was full and I was going in circles finding an open
spot. There were some protected bike lanes, but along the main road the bike lane became an elevated sidewalk next to
the cars and pedestrians. However most roads don't have bike lanes, and bikes have to ride alongside the cars. Follow
the marked pathway and turn lanes, otherwise dismount and walk alongside the pedestrians.

img bike

Queen's St East really felt like the slums of inner Toronto. Businesses literally falling apart and surrounded by the
homeless. It's clear that foot traffic is tethered off when the skyscrapers stop and old buildings begin. Like with many
cities, post-covid saw a spike in homelessness, the effects of which are more visible than ever.

![Bike rack, Dollarama surrounded by homeless in background](./20250603_122023.avif)

From the church to the Eaton center, I'm back to skyscrapers, busy streets, and tons of construction. Old Toronto has
lots of classical architecture wedged between glass towers, both charming but feeling out of place. The street along
Eaton Center similarly got plenty of historical buildings like the theater next to the newly renovated shopping complex.

![Interior of the Eaton Center](./20250603_125806.avif)

No visit to Toronto is complete without visiting Old City Hall and Nathan Phillips Square, a popular area for
photographing.

![Overview of Nathan Square](./20250603_133504.avif) ![Toronto sign](./20250603_133938.avif)

Then comes my Chinatown runback for Sunday. Approaching from Dundas West, there were plenty of small shops and a few
mini-malls with interesting food courts and local businesses. Chinatown runs primarily along Spadina Avenue, lined with
Asian businesses and dense foot traffic. The streetcar here also has a dedicated lane and platforms, one of the few in
Toronto's core.

![Grocery Store in Chinatown](./20250603_141207.avif)
![Beef noodles and mango sago at Mom's Pan Fried Buns](./20250603_151746.avif)

And of course, I had to see the Bluejays play in Roger's Stadium! Following the crowd and traffic officers to reach the
plaza near the CN tower, there are multiple entry gates with lines and security booths. The box office is permanently
closed, and tickets have to be bought online with the TicketMaster app. Gates open an hour early (an hour half on
weekends), but there really only a line as game time draws closer. Bag checks are also really lenient, I got in with my
school bag full of supplies and tomorrow's breakfast.

Once inside the stadium, there is security at every seating entrance and a couple of special locations for standing. The
$20 general admission doesn't give seats, so I had to find a spot in the open sections to stand and watch. This view was
from the fifth level of TD Park Social.

![View of the stadium from TD place](./20250603_192935.avif) ![1 dollar Hotdog](./20250603_175321.avif)

The game itself started with a bang. Great batting, two home runs, six runs! For the other team...

Baseball is a really slow sport to watch. Not helping was the fact that no plays happened for the next 6 innings, the
energy in the stadium was really sluggish. Any chants/cheers had to be prompted by the giant screen and loud music, as
otherwise, it's 15 seconds of silence between pitches. Coming from a city of NHL hockey, it's comically hilarious to see
the displays telling the crowd to GET HYPED AT TWO STRIKES!!! GET LOUD!!! Like it's both begging the crowd to get
excited and that a batter at two strikes is the pinnacle of exciting baseball gameplay lmao. At least watching fans
scramble to catch the foul balls was amusing.

![The Mario clones at the bar](./20250603_213754.avif)

Metro line 2 broke down on the way back ;(. Someone jumped onto the track and somehow caused a power outage? Of course
it had to be Sherbourne station too, just before the bridge crossing. With no streetcars or busses, here I am writing
the rest of today's blog. It was a long night.

![Me stuck on the subway with laptop](./20250603_223618.avif)

As an aside, the metro hasn't had a single day without some issues and delays. Surprise construction, security incidents
on platforms, or just bizarre incidents like tonight. For such a big city, it's clear that transit has been neglected
for decades, with how politicized transit has become among Toronto City Council and the Province of Ontario. There are
many great YouTubers covering this rabbit hole of urbanism that I've fallen into.

## Day 4 - Leslieville & The Beaches

For the final day of Toronto, I wanted to explore the area east of the Don Valley Parkway. Leslieville, along Dundas and
Queens St. East was frankly pitiful, so much so that I forgot to take any pictures. They are supposedly known for
brunches and some landmarks, but felt like a watered-down version of Queens West. What didn't help that today was a hot
25 degrees, and I ended up on Eastern Avenue with nothing but loud trucks and business parks.

The best way to Cheery Beach is through the Distillery District, saving the extra hour it would have taken me to walk
through Leslie St, with nothing but industrial trucks.

![That one dame street](./20250604_121434.avif)

Along the way, I discover Tatsuros, a Japanese hybrid brunch place. When I arrived around 12pm, they had run out of
their in-house iced tea and creme brulee toast. The toast I received was alright, but the dull cream overwhelmed the
blueberry jam, ruining what was a solid french toast.

![Tatsuros blueberry toast](./20250604_124031.avif)

After wandering through another park, I finally reached The Beaches. This is a long stretch of sand beaches, with a
half-hour long boardwalk and bike path. Lots of space to tan, and a whole array of volleyball nets. The coastal winds
really turn a hot day into a pleasant walk, and I found myself pretty comfortable strolling in the 25-degree weather.

![View of the beach from the boardwalk](./20250604_133319.avif) ![Mural on swimming pool](./20250604_135717.avif)

What a nice walk! Ended up hanging around to write todays blog.

![Me at the beach with laptopin hand](./20250604_142319.avif)

The end of The Beaches happens to be where the Queen's streetcar starts. This is an affordable way to see Toronto's
core, as Queens runs through much of the dense downtown. With a two hour transfer, I also planned to revisit Chinatown
for a certain location, and so I hop on for the long ride ahead.

![Queen's streetcar Beaches stop](./20250604_154305.avif)

Traffic, construction, and even more traffic, the further we traveled downtown, the more agonizing the stops became. It
actually becomes faster to bike as the few bike lanes within the core are the only remaining lanes not congested. Tldr:
expect delays, the streetcar is basically a big car stuck in constant rush hour traffic.

20 minutes behind schedule, and getting some braised beef noodles in Chinatown, I went to check out a Japanese arcade
called Yume. For fans of Japanese rhythm arcades and games, there are various imported machines from manufacturers like
Sony, Bandi Namco, Konami, etc, all modified to work with Yume's membership cards. There's also a couple of Mahjong
tables for open play. For about $10 an hour, I could see myself getting hooked. The venue is fairly small and gets busy
fast, so maybe visit on the weekday to avoid the crowd.

![Exterior of Yume](./20250604_180535.avif) ![Interior of Yume, taken from the back](./20250604_181128.avif)
![My first attempt at circle game](./20250604_184446.avif)

## Day 5 - Off to Ottawa

And that's the end of my Toronto trip! I knew my route was gonna be pretty strange, being that I've already seen the
main attractions so I focused on more obscure places.

Next up is Ottawa, 6 hour by Flixbus. Lets see how the smaller Capital compares!

![Hong kong breakfast at Sammi](./20250605_094305.avif)
![Interior of Union Station Bus Terminal](./20250605_104140.avif)
